---
date: 2011-08-16T23:00:00Z
title: 'Life (in IT) Lesson #5372: Learning To Say No, Keep Having Fun'
published: true
categories: [Craftsmanship]
type: article
external: false
---
<p>In case you haven't noticed I didn't blog for nearly a whole month.  Thats not like me.  Sure, I have my troughs (and peaks) but in terms of my overall social activity I may as well have been mostly dead.  My lame excuse?  I've been busy.  Yeah just like everybody else I've been working more than usual - but I've been taught a valuable lesson.  <strong>Fun</strong> is key.</p><p>Over the last month or so I've been gradually building up a collection of in-progress projects - just like Pokemon.  I was taking new ones on even when it felt risky and assuring people I could get the work done.  My hubris cost me, and others.  I spread myself too thin, I left no time for contingency and eventually I ended up, and this is really the best term for it so excuse the language, "fucking over" one of the projects at the worst possible time I can imagine.  I've always prided myself on the fact I can always stay on top of an extremely large amount of work and satisfy all the stakeholders.  I guess now I know my limit and I even have an indicator well before this threshold is met that I need to start waving a red flag - when it stops being <strong>fun</strong>.</p><p>I enjoy the vast majority of my work, but obviously there are some aspects that less than <strong>fun</strong> (writing documents, estimating etc.)<sup class="footnote" id="fnr1"><a href="#fn1">1</a></sup>.  What started happening was I was doing more <strong>non-fun</strong> work that <strong>fun</strong> work (in fact I was doing very little <strong>fun</strong> stuff at all).  This made me less productive, my heart wasn't fully in it and so I wasn't 100% focused.  I was less able to predict and plan accordingly and as things started happening on one project (on-site customer meetings etc.) another project had to take the hit and eventually one had to give.  The <strong>fun</strong> factor also meant I was taking on extra work in the vain hope that it might be more <strong>fun</strong>, which upon reflection, is pretty damn stupid.  Oh and lets not forget the fact I was holding off talking to people because of some insane belief that there was a good chance that things would look much better in "another hour or so".  Seldom was this the case of course so it mean't that I wasn't raising flags early enough and people felt I was being aloof.</p><p>So what will I be doing in future?  Well I now have a rule and I will see how it goes.  Simply put,</p><blockquote><p>I will only take on more work if I am currently having <strong>fun</strong> and the new work will not push me into the <strong>not fun</strong> work spectrum.  If I am <strong>not having fun</strong> I can only take on more work when I have cleared some of my work and am back having <strong>fun</strong>.  The closer I get to the <strong>not fun</strong> end of the spectrum the sooner and more frequent communication with stakeholders needs to be.</p></blockquote><p>Simple enough but it seems to hold up so far.</p><ul>	<li>Give me too much <strong>fun</strong> work and it stops being fun because there is too much pressure.</li></ul><ul>	<li>Give me a single <strong>not fun</strong> job that isn't fun and I will only accept it provided I can work on my own projects to re-address the <strong>fun</strong> ratio (blogging about experiences, related technologies etc.)</li></ul><p>This probably sounds quite selfish and, well, of course it is.  Nobody should expect me to just do whatever they say<sup class="footnote" id="fnr2"><a href="#fn2">2</a></sup> without at least making the deal appealing to me or at least allowing me a certain amount of free time to draw my own benefits from the situation.  For example I accept a certain amount of <strong>not fun</strong> work because I am permitted to do a lot of my own <strong>fun</strong> work to address the balance.</p><p>I think I've left this open enough for personal interpretation and flexibility but strict enough that there is a foundation here to aid in making decisions.  If I had applied this rule previously I wouldn't have taken the extra work (even though it seemed appealing at the time - it was <strong>fun</strong> and I got paid overtime for it) and both myself and the project would be in better shape.  But hey how can you ever learn if you never make mistakes?</p><p>Is the word <strong>fun</strong> starting to sound really weird to anyone else?</p><p class="footnote" id="fn1"><a href="#fnr1"><sup>1</sup></a> I realise some people <span class="caps">LOVE</span> writing documents and estimating - I don't.  They are just a necessary part of the job that I live with.</p><p class="footnote" id="fn2"><a href="#fnr2"><sup>2</sup></a> There is only one person that <span class="caps">CAN</span> - my wife and thats like the law.  The company I work for is great at trying to keep their workforce happy and I am in no way implying that they forced work on me.  They didn't.</p>